docs/internal/tooling/project-tree.md, before:

# Project File Tree Generation

This document defines how to generate a clean file tree for internal documentation, reviews, and discussions.

It is intended for developers and maintainers who produce internal artifacts in this repository.

It is not used for public documentation, marketing content, or onboarding guides.

---

## Purpose

The file tree is generated to document the current structure during reviews, align on changes in discussions, and keep internal documentation accurate.

The process is local-only and is not part of build or CI.

## Prerequisites

Required tools and environment:

- Node.js 18+
- Git
- A local clone of the repository

No global npm packages or system tools are required.

The formatting script runs locally using Node.js and is not part of CI or build pipelines.

## Step-by-step process

### Open terminal

Open Git Bash or a terminal, then go to the project root (the directory containing `.git`).

### Generate tracked file list

```bash
git ls-files > tree.git.txt
```

What this command does: it lists only tracked files, excludes ignored and untracked files, and produces a stable, git-accurate snapshot.

### Format tree snapshot

```bash
node make-tree.js
```

What this command does: it reads `tree.git.txt`, generates a structured, human-readable tree, and writes the result to `tree.pretty.txt`.

Both files are local-only artifacts and are not committed.

## Git policy

Ignored local artifacts:

- `make-tree.js`
- `tree.git.txt`
- `tree.pretty.txt`

These rules live in `.gitignore`.

## Local file artifacts

The following files may appear in the project root during local work:

- `make-tree.js`
- `tree.git.txt`
- `tree.pretty.txt`

These files are excluded from the repository and are listed in `.gitignore`.

They are safe to keep locally and do not need to be deleted after generation.

If the project file structure changes and an updated snapshot is required, delete `tree.git.txt` and `tree.pretty.txt`, then regenerate them by following the steps described in this document.

The script and generated files are local tooling artifacts and are never part of version control history.

## Best practices

Regenerate the tree before updating docs, do not rely on outdated snapshots, and treat the tree as context rather than a source of truth.

## Summary

Generate locally, keep artifacts uncommitted, and document only the final tree snapshot.

This document is the structural reference for internal tooling and workflow documentation.

Commit message:

docs: clarify make-tree.js role in file tree generation

docs/internal/tooling/project-tree.md, after:

# Project File Tree Generation

This document defines how to generate a clean file tree for internal documentation, reviews, and discussions.

It is intended for developers and maintainers who produce internal artifacts in this repository.

It is not used for public documentation, marketing content, or onboarding guides.

---

## Purpose

The file tree is generated to document the current structure during reviews, align on changes in discussions, and keep internal documentation accurate.

The process is local-only and is not part of build or CI.

## Prerequisites

Required tools and environment:

- Node.js 18+
- Git
- A local clone of the repository
- The file `make-tree.js` must exist in the repository root.
  It is a tracked tooling script and must not be deleted.

No global npm packages or system tools are required.

The formatting script runs locally using Node.js and is not part of CI or build pipelines.

## Step-by-step process

### Open terminal

Open Git Bash or a terminal, then go to the project root (the directory containing `.git`).

### Generate tracked file list

```bash
git ls-files > tree.git.txt
```

What this command does: it lists only tracked files, excludes ignored and untracked files, and produces a stable, git-accurate snapshot.

### Format tree snapshot

```bash
node make-tree.js
```

The script reads `tree.git.txt` and generates `tree.pretty.txt`.
What this command does: it reads `tree.git.txt`, generates a structured, human-readable tree, and writes the result to `tree.pretty.txt`.

Both files are local-only artifacts and are not committed.

## Git policy

Ignored local artifacts:

- `make-tree.js`
- `tree.git.txt`
- `tree.pretty.txt`

These rules live in `.gitignore`.

## Local file artifacts

The following files may appear in the project root during local work:

- `make-tree.js` — tracked tooling file (not deleted)
- `tree.git.txt` — local artifact
- `tree.pretty.txt` — local artifact

These files are excluded from the repository and are listed in `.gitignore`.

They are safe to keep locally and do not need to be deleted after generation.

If the project file structure changes and an updated snapshot is required, delete `tree.git.txt` and `tree.pretty.txt`, then regenerate them by following the steps described in this document.

The script and generated files are local tooling artifacts and are never part of version control history.

## Best practices

Regenerate the tree before updating docs, do not rely on outdated snapshots, and treat the tree as context rather than a source of truth.

## Summary

Generate locally, keep artifacts uncommitted, and document only the final tree snapshot.

This document is the structural reference for internal tooling and workflow documentation.
